EP1scorAL snccnssmx IN cLoNMACNOISE. 101

1. Declaration of the Bishops and Clergy assembled at Clon-
macnoise, 4th December, 1649.

(From the Wadding Papers, Rome.)

By the Ecclesiastical Congu· of the Kingdom of Ireland, we
the ArchB⁵· Bishs· ἃ other Ordinaries St Prelates of this King-
dom of Ireland, having met at Glonmacnoise proprio motae on
the fourth day of December, in the year of our Lord Grod 1649
taking into our consideration among other, the affairs then
.agitated ὣ determined for 'the Preservation of the Kingdom
that many of our F look are mislead wth a vain opinion of hopes
that the Commander in Chief of the Rebel F orces commonly
called Parliamentaries, would afford them good Conditions, and
that relying thereon, they suffer utter Destruction of Religion,
Lives ἃ, fortunes if not prevented. Το undeceive them in this
their ungrounded expectation we do hereby declare as a most
-oertain truth that the Enemy’s Resolution is to extirpate the
Catholic Religion out of all his Majesty's Dominions‚ as by
:their several covenants doth appear, & the Practice wherever
*their power doth extend, as is manifested by Cromwell’s Letter
-of the l9th of October 1649, to the then Governor of Ross, his
words are “for that weh yu mention concerning Liberty os:
Religion, I meddle not with any man’s conscience, but if by
Liberty of Conscience you mean a Liberty to exercise the Mass,
Ι J udge it best to use plain dealing ἅτ to let you know, where
the Parliament of England. have Power that will not be allowed
*ofss' This Tyrannical Resolution they have put in Execution
:in lVexford Drogheda, Rosse ὣ elsewhere ἅτ it is notoriously
known that by Acts of Parliament called the Acts of Subscrip-
‘tion the Estates of the Inhabitants of this Kingdom are sold,
so there remaineth now no more but to put the Purehasers in
Possession, by the Power of F orces drawn out of England, S:
for the common sort of People, towards whom if they show any
more moderate usage at the present, it is to no other end but
for their private advantage, ἃ for the better support of their
army, intending at ,the close of their Oonquest (if they can
effect the same, as God forbid) to root out the Commons also
ἃ plant their Land with Colonies to be brought hither out of
England, as witness the number they have already sent hence,
for the Tobacco mande, and put Enemies in their Places.

And in effect this Banishment or other destructions of the
common People must follow the Resolution of extirpating the
Catholic Religion, which is not to be effected without the Mas-
asacring or Banishment of the Catholic Inhabitants.

